---
layout: post
author: john
---

Where did Moses power in the public authorities come from?

typically, public authories finance their project through the sale of bonds.
There is a single bond issue, with a set time-line, after which the bonds must
be repaid, the work is turned over to the city, and the authority ceases to
exist.
If you have a cash surplus, this must be spent paying off bonds before
maturity-- you can't spend it on anything else.

Moses' brilliant line was to add an amendment to the existing legislation,
specifically the Triborough Bridge Authority act, that allows him to REFUND
existing bonds by the issuance of new bonds, independent of bond maturity, and
can issue these new bonds partly to refund the existing bonds and partly FOR ANY
OTHER CORPORATE PURPOSE.

The legislation limits the amount of bonds an authority can have outstanding to
be equal to the amount required to pay for the specific project the authority
was created to build. So in practice it looks like this:

Bridge costs 50 million to build-> 50 million dollars in bonds can be issued.
After a few years, after paying off interest/debt, etc, you have accumulated a
surplus of 20 million dollars. You can call in 20 million of the existing bonds,
and pay those off, so now the total indebtedness is only 30 million dollars.
Before Moses, this is where things stopped. Now the authority only owes 30
milion. After his amendment, however, the authority can reissue 20M in new bonds
up to the 50 million dollar limit, and spend the 20M on ANY CORPORATE PURPOSE
WHATSOEVER.

Morever, this also lets the authority exist indefinitely. If before there was a
40 year limit on bonds, then after you pay off the first issue (in at most 40
years), the authority ceases to exist. However, with this modification, after 39
years, you can do a new 40-year bond issue, use the proceeds to pay off the
outstanding bonds, and then buy yourself another 40 years of life, etc. Now,
Moses' creations can never die.

Now, all of this is just a piece of legislation. Once the governor or the mayor
realized the scope of the power they'd inadvertenly given Moses, they could
rescind this power by changing the legislation. Thus, the authorities (and
Moses') power was in a precarious position vis-a-viz the legislature. This is
where his second master-stroke comes in.

Moses amended the act to allow the Authority to pass resolutions governing the
sale of bonds. These resolutions could include things like the specific
toll-rates, authority rules and regulations, and "any other matters... [which]
affect the security or protection of the bonds." Moreover, these resolutions are
part of a contract with the holders of the bonds.

Why does this matter? Article 1, Section 10 of the Constitution says "No
state...shall pass... any law impairing the obligation of contracts." Moses has
the power to essentially copy the text of the legislation granting the public
authority broad powers into the bond, which is a contract. The legislature is
unable to rescind those powers withong impairing the obligation of the bond
contract, so now this extreme power can only be removed by the mutual consent of
both parties to the contract-- the bondholders and the public authority, aka
Moses.

When La Guardia attempted to challenge this authority, Moses' reply was succint:
"I think you had better read the agreements and the contracts."

The contracts are crystal clear. The Legislature cannot revoke the public
authorities power. However, the mayor could revoke Moses' power by removing him
from the public authorities. Or could he?

The final masterstroke is not legislative, but political. In some cases, like
the Henry Hudson bridge, Moses was the sole member of the authority. In some
cases, like the Triborough Bridge authority, Moses was appointed chairman and,
based on his previous legislation, he could not be removed without specific
evidence of wrongdoing until his term expired in 3 years. In other cases, Moses'
position on the authority rested on his appointment as Park Comissioner. In
theory, La Guardia could fire him as commisioner and remove him from a few of
the authorities. Politicaly, this would have been a disaster. As Caro notes, if
Moses were removed, e.g. from the Rockaway Improvement Authority, Moses would
have used his influence with the state legislature to cut-off state funds from
the project. The city could not foot the bill alone, so the project would remain
uncompleted-- Atlantic Avenue would remain a 3 mile stretch of rubble. Moses
would use this to ruin him-- would the public allow personal animosity to stand
in the way of a great improvement for the public? The Order number 129 affair
with roosevelt had shown him that it would not. 

Aside from the political disaster, La Guardia also needed Moses to construct the
big public works in the city he wanted, the public works and improvements he had
dreamed of for the city and that he required for his reelection campaigns. Moses
was at least secure in his power. He no longer needed executive support.
